

                         McDonald Valley Calibration Exercise


                                    INTRODUCTION

   In this problem, we have designed a hypothetical field problem. You will
get to go through a simulation analysis much as you would in simulating a real
field problem. The exercise is intended to give you experience in calibrating
a flow model when you have limited information and are forced to make
decisions about how to use limited resources to obtain useful new information.
We will approach this problem in four stages:


STAGE 1 --

  Review the existing information and the project objectives to design an
  effective approach to simulating the system. It is at this stage where you
  want to consider the pros and cons of various boundary conditions,
  discretization schemes, etc.


STAGE 2 --

  Make a first attempt at developing a calibrated model for the predevelopment
  condition based on existing data that we will give you.


STAGE 3 --

  Obtain new field information to help you improve your description of the flow
  system. Use the new information to refine your calibrated predevelopment
  model. You should use your simulations in stage 2 to guide your data
  collection activities in stage 3. In real life, you always have limited
  resources and are forced to make choices about what kind of information is
  worth obtaining and what is not. We try to create that same type of situation
  in this problem by setting up a simulated "project" with an initial amount of
  money that you can use to buy information, such as drilling wells, conducting
  slug tests, running seismic sections, etc. The budget is tight, so you will
  be forced to think carefully about what information to buy.


STAGE 4 --

  Simulate the effects of the proposed stresses using the calibrated parameters
  from stage 3.



                               Background Information

  McDonald Valley is an undeveloped, closed alluvial valley surrounded by low
permeability crystalline bedrock (figures 1 and 2). The valley is dominated by
scenic Lake Harbaugh located in the northwest corner of the valley (lots are
available).  Lake Harbaugh sits in a gentle depression that is bounded by Sand
Ridge, which extends from the western edge of the valley to the northeastern
corner. The south face of Sand Ridge is relatively steep. South of Sand Ridge,
the valley slopes gently toward the southern boundary. The Straight River,
which has its headwaters at the base of sand ridge just south of Lake
Harbaugh, flows south and eventually leaves the valley along the southern
boundary. 

  You have been given the task of examining the possible effects of ground
water development that has been proposed for McDonald Valley. The following
development has been proposed:


  1. A 268,000 ft3/d well in the southern part of the valley at either site 1
or site 2 as shown in figure 2. The well would provide a water supply for
Virginia City located to the south of McDonald Valley.

  2. A 67,000 ft3/d well is located in the northern part of the valley (site 3
in figure 2). This well would provide natural spring water for Reilly's
Premium Beverages, Inc. 


The county is concerned about the effect of this development. Specifically,
the county is concerned that:

  1. Development will cause excessive water table declines in the northern
half of the valley where a number of summer homes have very shallow water
table wells that are used for domestic supply. The county has established the
requirement that any development not cause more than a 2 foot decline in the
water table anywhere in the northern half of the valley. Consultants for the
Reilly Brewing Company contend that pumping from the Reilly well will have a
negligible effect on the water table because the well will be placed below a
clay layer that occurs across much of the northern part of the valley.

  2. McDonald Valley is the site of the Pollock's Ford National Historic Site
and Recreation Area located 1000 feet south of the headwaters of the Straight
River. Pollock's Ford is the site of an heroic fording of the Straight River
during the battle for Sand Ridge during the American Revolution. Even though
easier routes around the north side of the headwaters were discovered within
minutes of Pollock's heroic crossing, the event nevertheless remains one of
extreme historic importance. The county maintains a stream gage at Pollock's
Ford and has decided that any potential development by Virginia City or
Reilly's Brewery must not reduce the stream flow at that site by more than 20
percent. In addition, the county is requiring that development not lead to any
induced infiltration from the Straight River anywhere along its course.

  3. Water quality issues:

      A. An increase in the number of vacation cabins in the northern part of
the valley has lead to concern about the impact of septic systems on Lake
Harbaugh. The county is interested in determining the source area for ground
water that discharges to Lake Harbaugh so that it can develop effective and
rational regulations for septic system permits. 

      B. Reilly's was required to do a capture zone analysis to determine the
source area for its deep well. The company's consultants did a model of the
Reilly site and concluded that the source area is contained entirely within
the Reilly property. The county suspects that that analysis is not correct
because the boundaries of the model extended only to the property lines of 
the Reilly facility. A flow model of the entire valley would provide a better
basis for evaluating the source area for the well.

      C. The county is requiring capture zone analyses for the proposed
Virginia City wells.
   




                  Hydrogeology and Hydrology of McDonald Valley

Hydrogeology
------------

   The valley contains unconsolidated valley fill alluvium. No hydraulic tests
have been performed in the valley, but the sediments are similar to those in
other valleys in the area which generally have horizontal hydraulic
conductivities ranging between 10 feet/day and 500 feet/day. The sediments are
predominantly medium to coarse grained sands and some gravels, however a low
permeability lake clay has been observed in some bore holes in the valley. The
valley contains 17 existing observations wells. Well logs for those 17 wells
are presented in Table 1. The crystalline bedrock surrounding the valley has a
very low hydraulic conductivity.


Hydrology
---------

    The hydrologic system in McDonald Valley is in steady state with no
significant seasonal or short term fluctuations in conditions.

    McDonald Valley has a mean annual precipitation of 36 inches per year
based on measurements made at Lake Harbaugh. Other stations in the area also
report annual precipitation of 36 inches per year. 

    There is no surface water inflow into the valley. The Straight River
originates in McDonald Valley. The headwaters of the river is located 9000
feet upstream from the southern boundary of the valley. The river stage at the
southern boundary of the valley is defined to be 0, the datum to which all
other head measurements in the valley are referenced. The stream gradient is
0.0002, which corresponds to a stage of 1.8 feet at the headwaters. The river
is approximately 100 feet wide over its entire length and has a depth of 1
foot or less in most locations. Stream gages are located at the river's
southern discharge point and at Pollock's Ford.


               Measured Stream Flow (ft3/d)         Location
               -----------------------------------------------------
                      884,494             Southern Boundary (gage 1)
                       96,402                Pollock's Ford (gage 2)


    Lake Harbaugh is a dominant hydrologic feature in the valley. A previous
study of Lake Harbaugh yielded the following information:

               Stage = 11 feet  
    Area of the lake = 1.625 x 10**7 square feet
    Lake Evaporation = 27 inches per year (2.25 ft/y)
       Precipitation = 36 inches per year (3 ft/y)

Lake Harbaugh is a closed lake with no surface water inflow or outflow. The
morphology of the lake basin consists of a relatively steep sloping shore that
levels out to a very uniform depth of 16 feet within 50 feet of the lake
shore. The lake bottom is sandy and free of fine grained sediments over most
of its bottom, especially near the shore. Very minor amounts of fine grained
sediments occur in the very center of the lake basin.


                                Table 1
           
                        Data for Existing Wells

  
 *********************************** Well  1 *********************************
 (Row  3  Column 18)
 Top of screen = -195.74 feet; Bottom of screen = -200.74 feet
 Water Table =   12.05 feet;  Head in screened interval =   11.85
  
 Drillers Log : 
   12.05 to  -50.65 >very coarse sand with occasional thin gravel layers
  -50.65 to  -51.87 >tight clay
  -51.87 to -200.74 >very coarse sand with occasional thin gravel layers
 -200.74 to    ?    >Bedrock
  
 *********************************** Well  2 *********************************
 (Row  4  Column 11)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =   11.63 feet;  Head in screened interval =   11.35
  
 Drillers Log : 
   11.63 to  -50.35 >coarse sand with occasional stringers of fine sand
  -50.35 to  -51.47 >tight clay
  -51.47 to -100.00 >coarse sand with occasional stringers of fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well  3 *********************************
 (Row  7  Column 21)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =   12.15 feet;  Head in screened interval =   11.83
  
 Drillers Log : 
   12.15 to  -50.86 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  -50.86 to  -51.95 >tight clay
  -51.95 to -100.00 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well  4 *********************************
 (Row 13  Column 23)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =   11.44 feet;  Head in screened interval =   11.43
  
 Drillers Log : 
   11.44 to -100.00 >coarse sand with occasional stringers of fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well  5 *********************************
 (Row 15  Column 12)
 Top of screen = -219.62 feet; Bottom of screen = -224.62 feet
 Water Table =   10.86 feet;  Head in screened interval =   10.50
  
 Drillers Log : 
   10.86 to  -50.59 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  -50.59 to  -51.93 >tight clay
  -51.93 to -224.62 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
 -224.62 to    ?    >Bedrock
  
 *********************************** Well  6 *********************************
 (Row 17  Column 19)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =   10.80 feet;  Head in screened interval =   10.79
  
 Drillers Log : 
   10.80 to -100.00 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well  7 *********************************
 (Row 18  Column  2)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =    9.16 feet;  Head in screened interval =    9.13
  
 Drillers Log : 
    9.16 to -100.00 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well  8 *********************************
 (Row 19  Column  7)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =    8.82 feet;  Head in screened interval =    8.79
  
 Drillers Log : 
    8.82 to -100.00 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well  9 *********************************
 (Row 20  Column 12)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =    8.86 feet;  Head in screened interval =    8.83
  
 Drillers Log : 
    8.86 to -100.00 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well 10 *********************************
 (Row 19  Column 23)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =   10.65 feet;  Head in screened interval =   10.64
  
 Drillers Log : 
   10.65 to -100.00 >coarse sand with occasional stringers of fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well 11 *********************************
 (Row 27  Column  6)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =    4.26 feet;  Head in screened interval =    4.25
  
 Drillers Log : 
    4.26 to -100.00 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well 12 *********************************
 (Row 28  Column 12)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =    4.19 feet;  Head in screened interval =    4.18
  
 Drillers Log : 
    4.19 to -100.00 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well 13 *********************************
 (Row 29  Column 24)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =    7.57 feet;  Head in screened interval =    7.56
  
 Drillers Log : 
    7.57 to -100.00 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well 14 *********************************
 (Row 31  Column  7)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =    2.70 feet;  Head in screened interval =    2.69
  
 Drillers Log : 
    2.70 to -100.00 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well 15 *********************************
 (Row 34  Column 15)
 Top of screen = -228.22 feet; Bottom of screen = -233.22 feet
 Water Table =    4.59 feet;  Head in screened interval =    4.57
  
 Drillers Log : 
    4.59 to -233.22 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
 -233.22 to    ?    >Bedrock
  
 *********************************** Well 16 *********************************
 (Row 37  Column  2)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =    2.76 feet;  Head in screened interval =    2.73
  
 Drillers Log : 
    2.76 to -100.00 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  
 *********************************** Well 17 *********************************
 (Row 38  Column 23)
 Top of screen =  -95.00 feet; Bottom of screen = -100.00 feet
 Water Table =    6.23 feet;  Head in screened interval =    6.22
  
 Drillers Log : 
    6.23 to -100.00 >medium sand with some interbedded fine sand
  

                              
   

